A lot of women come with their partners
to see me and say, "I don't understand.
We're both doing the same training. He's
leaning up and getting fitter. I'm
putting weight on getting slower." And
that is because we have puberty. We have
our reproductive years. We may not have
pregnancy in there. We have
permenopause. We have postmenopause. We
have a menstrual cycle. Each one of
those is a different hormone profile
that can affect the way we eat and the
way we train. But no one told us this or
what we can do until right now. Dr.
Stacy Sims is an exercise physiologist
and nutrition scientist whose
bestselling books and over 100
peer-reviewed studies is revolutionizing
how women can optimize their health,
fitness, and longevity by working with
their unique physiology. We're looking
at sport science research. Everything
from training to eating, recovery, it's
based on male data, and women have been
generalized to that data. Things like we
see men do really well on calorie
restriction and fasting, but for women
doesn't happen that way and we'll talk
about that. And we also know that during
puberty, girls hips widen, shoulders
widen, which changes our angle of knee
to hip, what we call the Q angle. So
they don't feel comfortable running or
swimming or jumping. And because they're
not taught this stuff, we see that by
the age of 14, girls who previously were
sporty, over 60% of them drop out of
sport. The problem is it's never about
how we can empower women to use their
physiology to their advantage. So let's
change that. Let's go. As it relates to
nutrition and exercise, how do I need to
adapt across the menstrual cycle? What's
your view on cold plunges and
supplements like creatine? And what's
the variant between men and women as it
relates to sleep? And then let's talk
about menopause. Starting with per
menopause. I'm excited.
The diary of a CEO is independently fact
checked. For any studies or science
mentioned in this episode, please check
the show notes. This has always blown my
mind a little bit. 53% of you that
listen to this show regularly haven't
yet subscribed to the show. So, could I
ask you for a favor before we start? If
you like the show and you like what we
do here and you want to support us, the
free simple way that you can do just
that is by hitting the subscribe button.
And my commitment to you is if you do
that, then I'll do everything in my
power, me and my team, to make sure that
this show is better for you every single
week. We'll listen to your feedback.
We'll find the guests that you want me
to speak to and we'll continue to do
what we do. Thank you so much.
Dr. Stacy Sims,
what is the work that you do and why is
it so important that you do it?
I look at sex differences in exercise
and nutrition because when we think
about everything that we know for
protocols from training to eating
recovery, it's based on male data. And
as a female athlete and working with
women across all ages, just trying to
maximize their potential, you have to
lean into different data, but people
aren't aware of it. So as I'm looking at
what I do and trying to empower women to
understand their own bodies, realize
that there's a lot of research that
still needs to be done. So if we think
about something like caffeine and
caffeine intake, right? And people are
talking about how it either boosts them
or not. Yeah. If we look at all the data
on performance about caffeine enhancing
performance, there isn't anything that's
been done on women. So if we're looking
at how does that work for a woman, we
have to look and say, okay, how much
exercise have you done? Where are you
using the caffeine? When are you using
it? Because we fuel differently during
exercise. So we go through blood sugar
quickly. Caffeine clears blood sugar. So
a woman is going to have to eat when she
uses caffeine, whereas a man doesn't
have to.
You said it's based on male data. How
can you quantify that? like paint the
picture for me that proves this this is
the case for someone that might not
understand the significance of what you
just said. So if we're looking at sports
science research and I'll just bring it
down to sport science because that's the
exercise and nutrition research. If
we're looking at who's around the room
when we're recruiting for studies for
the most part the language around
recruitment is geared for
getting men because we're using a lot of
aggressive language in sport. So it's
offputting to a lot of women. The other
aspect about sport science research is
there's limited funding. So then we're
looking at okay, how can we get people
in that can come in for day after day or
week to week. Most often it's men.
When we look at what we're doing, we
might be doing muscle biopsies. We might
be doing blood draws. And if that's not
explained in advance, it's a little
off-putting to people. So when we're
looking at the major recruitment
strategies and the people that will say
yes, I'll come and do this study, it's
18 to 22 year old college age men. And
that's just been the norm. And when we
look at how studies are designed, and
we're looking again at who's in the room
who's designing the studies, primarily
it's men. Why? because we see that most
of the PIs on the studies and most of
the um I guess scientists that are
coming up in academia are primarily men.
When did you realize this? The first
time I realized it from an academic
standpoint was when I was a second year
at university and I was a participant in
metabolism lab and I was one of the only
women and I standardized properly. I did
all the things I was supposed to do cuz
I come from a military family. I know
how to follow rules. And at the end of
the two weeks of experiments, they threw
my results out. Why exactly? So I asked
why. And they're like, "Well, your
results don't jive with what we thought
we were going to see. They don't mesh
with the results that we got from the
men. So they're an anomaly. So we're not
going to put them in for the the context
of talking about how carbohydrate
metabolism was going." And I thought
that was very strange and I was
like,"Well, I've done everything
properly. How come mine are the anomaly
and those guys aren't the anomaly? How
do you know that?" And they didn't have
an answer for it. So that was like the
sticking point for me to understand why
would my results be an anomaly when I
have done exactly the same thing as what
the men had done. And it came down to
menstrual cycle. came down to
understanding that one week I was in a
low hormone state and then the next week
I wasn't. So when I started talking
about that, this is where the um
professor who was in charge of the
metabolism labs like well we don't study
women because they have a menstrual
cycle and we just study men because
they're easier and we don't have to
worry about hormone fluctuations
interfering with our results. And at
that point I was like, "Excuse me, what?
What are you talking about?" So that was
a defining point from an academic
standpoint. But the seed had been
planted two years prior when my dad who
was a colonel in the army was like, "So
what do you want to do when you finish
graduate or when you graduate from high
school?" And I said, "I wanted to be an
Army Ranger or Navy Seal." And he said,
"Well, you can't." And I said, "Why
can't I?" And he said, "Cuz you're a
girl." I was like, "What? what does that
mean? And he said, "Well, they don't
accept women in in the SEALs or the
Rangers. It's a special ops and they
don't accept women." And that was the
first time in my life I've ever heard
that I was limited because I was a
female and I didn't match what the norm
was cuz my whole life I'd been playing
with boys, competing against boys. I
mean, like, it was just a normal. Didn't
matter if you were a boy or a girl. It
just was what you wanted to do. And then
when my dad said, "Well, you can't
because you're a girl." That was the
first seed that had been planted and
really made me upset and said, "Well,
this doesn't make sense." And then when
I got to university and that happened,
that was the definitive seed that just
really pushed me into the whole academic
and sporting career that I've led over
the past 20ome years. Give me an
overview of that career, the sort of
significant milestones and the research
that you've done that's fed into
everything that you know today. I've
been a competitive athlete most of my
life. So I would I raced bikes
professionally. I did Iron Man. I did
Xterra. And I would have teammates who
would ask me questions of um you like
how am I fueling? How am I going to
perform my best? So we take those
questions into the lab. So we were
looking at how do we optimally fuel or
how do we optimally uh climatize the
heat when we're at a point in our
menstrual cycle where we don't have as
much heat tolerance. So that we see when
progesterone comes up after ovulation,
our core temperature comes up, we don't
have as much heat tolerance. So how do
we adjust for that? So there are a lot
of questions that would come through
just by the nature of being surrounded
by competitive athletes and being a
competitive athlete. So, we look at
things like we know now that when you
want to do um acclimatization to the
heat and I bring this up because if I
live in New Zealand in the wintertime
and I'm trying to train for something
like Kona that happens in Hawaii and we
max out at uh you know 10° C in the
winter but we have to face 40° C to race
Iron Man and we get into a sauna and we
want to accommodate for that heat. We
know that men can go seven days in a row
and be fine to then race in the heat.
But for women, depends on which phase of
the menstrual cycle and if you are going
in the high hormone phase, then we say,
"Okay, well, you don't need a primer.
You can just go in and do nine days in a
row. But if you start in the low hormone
phase, you actually have to go into the
sauna for five minutes, come back out,
and then go back in and do that during
the low hormone phase for nine days in a
row." So there are different nuances in
the way that your body responds to the
heat and is able to accommodate for
those heat shifts versus a man can just
go in and accommodate for that and be
ready for the race. So give me your CV.
Oh gosh, not the whole thing. It's it's
pretty varied. Um what did you study? Uh
exercise physiology and metabolism.
Okay. And then um got into ultr running
when I was doing my masters at
Springfield. Um and then I started
getting into more Iron Man distance
stuff
um before I started my PhD. And you went
to Springfield College as well. Yeah. So
that was my masters. Your masters. What
did you study in your masters? That
again was exercise fizz and metabolism.
And then you did a PhD. Yep. Uh what was
your PhD on as well? So my PhD was
looking at differences between men and
women in heat performance. Okay. And how
you climatize to it and how you hydrate
for it. Um as well as looking between
menstrual cycle phases and oral
contraceptive pill use in women. Um and
again all of these topics were designed
because of questions I had for myself or
teammates had. And then from PhD I went
to Stanford and was working um in the
high performance lab and then moved over
to do a posttock with Marcia Stefanic
who was the PI for the women's health
initiative. So looking at um hormone
replacement therapy in menopausal women
but also looking at exercise as a cohort
to that. And I had another hand in the
high performance um research in human
biology. So I would mesh human
performance with public health and then
that transcend into a lot of the stuff
that I do now looking at what can we do
taking some of the ideas from high
performance and apply it to general
population and how does that improve
people's longevity well-being but also
for those who are trying to be parents
who have a high performing job who want
to do well in their age group race
whatever it is how can we maximize some
of the things we know from high
performance with regards to sleep, heat,
cold, and apply that to a person who's
just trying to get everything done, and
what small things they can tweak to
improve their own training and
performance. And you've authored more
than 100 peer-reviewed studies on
exercise physiology. Yeah. And you're a
research scientist at the University of
New Zealand. I am a research scientist
at AUT. It's where most of my PhD
students are. and we have a women's
health program and then I also have an
adjunct with the lifestyle medicine um
at Stanford. So that's where a lot of
the public health research comes in. And
when we talk about the the differences
between men and women,
what exactly are those differences? Is
it just the menstrual cycle that causes
these differences or is there other
physiological differences that we need
to understand in order to understand the
subjects we're going to talk about today
around exercise, nutrition, and the
variances between men and women there?
There are sex differences in uterero. I
mean when we look uh what does that
mean? So the sex differences when the
baby's developing. Okay. So we look at
stress and the mom under stress. We see
that there's a higher incidence of a
miscarriage if it's a developing boy
fetus than a girl fetus. And it has to
do with XX versus XY. Then after birth
we see that there's relatively little
sex difference that is apparent until
the onset of puberty. But when we're
looking at those sex differences that
aren't that apparent, there are there.
We see that there's a sex difference in
what we call muscle morphology. So that
means that men are born with more fast
twitch fibers. So they have more
anorobic capacity as they get older.
They have more ability to produce power.
We see that um girls are born with more
endurance type fibers. So this means
they have more mitochondria for oxygen
consumption and oxidative stress and
being able to go along and slow. Then
when we get to the onset of puberty, we
see an expansion of these sex
differences with the exposure of the sex
hormones. So what we're seeing is now
the boys are getting leaner, they're
getting faster, they're getting more
aggressive, but girls bodies completely
change because center of gravity drops
from the chest down to the lower abdomen
area because their hips widen and their
hips widen because you know being XX
they have to then accommodate for
getting pregnant and eventually having a
baby from a biological standpoint. Hips
widen, shoulders widen. This changes the
um angle of the knee to the hip. So we
then have a Yep. So for anyone
listening, this is there's an image I
have here which I'll put on the screen
and I'll also link below and it's called
the Q angle. Q angle. Yes. Which is like
the angle of my knee to hip. Yeah. And
it's showing that women's Q angle
basically like the shape of the gap
between your leg is is it roughly 15°?
What is it? Do you know? Yeah. Yeah.
And so when we're looking at girls whose
bodies are changing, we see that by the
age of 14, girls who previously were
sporty, over 60% of them drop out of
sport because they're not taught that
their bodies are changing. So they don't
feel comfortable running or swimming or
jumping or landing because they have a
new um Q angle. They become quad
dominant. Their center of gravity is
different. Their shoulders are wider. So
they don't feel comfortable running
because their whole running mechanics
change. So, you know, when we're looking
at girls who are eight, they can keep up
with the boys, right? Their bodies
haven't quite started changing yet. By
the time they're 10, they're starting to
see a discrepancy. And I say that cuz my
daughter's now 12 and I've seen it over
the course of the elementary school
years where they used to be on par with
the boys playing soccer and rugby and
stuff on the field. And then you start
seeing a more where the boys are
becoming more aggressive and they're
kicking the balls faster and running
faster. And the girls are starting to
develop a little bit more, getting a
little bit more body fat, feeling a
little bit more comfortable running.
They can't do the monkey bars anymore
because their center of gravity is
lower. So they can't get up and do the
monkey part bars as well. But no one
explains this to them. So then when we
see this discrepancy of being sporty,
not sporty, we see um you know changes
in body composition and all of this is
in those early stages of the teen years
which is another knock because we also
have brain changes where girls become
more um self-aware and boys don't.
They're like, "Okay, you know what? You
piss me off. I'm going to beat you up
and we're going to get on with it." But
girls are very self-aware and they hold
things to themselves in a more negative
fashion. And this creates a lot of mood
changes. And this also creates a feeling
of of of negative body positivity. So
they don't feel that comfortable with
how they look or who they are. And
society doesn't help that either. So
this all perpetuates in a socioultural
as well as a biological change with
regards to exercise.
And as it relates to we'll talk about
the Q angle a little bit more in a
second when we talk about exercise but
the as it relates to the other changes
um fat differences in men and women.
Yeah. So if we see essential fat for men
is around 4 to 8%. So that means what we
need for our nerves and just survival.
Okay. For women essential fat is around
12%. Okay. So this is for nerves and and
looking around our essential organs to
survive. We look at body composition
itself, we see that women tend to sit
around 20% as a normal healthy
individual, although the data has
changed over the years. Um, and men sit
around 15%. And what about the heart?
How's the heart different in men and
women? So, women have smaller heart and
lungs. Yeah. Relative to relative body
size to men. We also have less
hemoglobin. So, that means our oxygen
carrying capacity is lower. uh because
if we are looking at our red cells and
we have four different what we call heem
molecules in a red cell and each one
carries oxygen our red cell count is
lower as compared to men because the red
cell count is driven by testosterone. So
men have around 100% more
um aromatized testosterone as compared
to women. So this increases the carrying
capacity of oxygen which means it goes
to the muscles can deliver more fuel to
the muscles to be able to contract
better have more power more strength.
Does that mean women breathe more
exercising the same? Not that they
breathe more. When we're talking about
oxygen carrying capacity, this is the
amount that you're taking into the
lungs, how it transfers to the red cells
to then be able to go to the working
muscles to give the muscles the
available fuel to do a contraction. So,
it's not a respiratory rate, it's the
ability for you to breathe in and how
fast that can be conducted to the
muscle. But, so there's going to be an
impact on endurance then. It's more of a
power and speed factor. Okay. Okay.
Okay. Because the speed in which the
oxygen can get to the muscles is what's
being impacted and the volume of oxygen
that can get to the muscles. Yep. Okay.
Fine. And then you said the lungs are s
sort of I read 25 to 30% smaller
than a man's lungs typically. Yeah. And
what's the impact of that as it relates
to exercise?
So when we're looking at um I guess
world records right that have been kept
and we see there's a gender gap there
and this is slowly closing in the
endurance world but that has to do with
muscle morphology with regards to being
able to go along and slow. We're looking
at the sprint capacity where we have to
have a quick transference of oxygen and
quick muscle contraction. that gap isn't
closing and that is because we have
smaller lungs, smaller heart, we have
less blood volume, we have less red
cells. So the overall capacity for
quickly developing power and speed is at
a smaller um I guess it's a limited
capacity in women versus men.
And in your book raw and page four in
the opening of the book, you talk about
how women are 52% as strong as men in
their upper bodies and 66% as strong as
they are in their lower bodies. But when
women train, they can become 70 to 80%
as strong as men. Mhm. So when we're
looking at resistance training itself,
we see that women relative to men can
accommodate and develop muscle just as
well as men in the lower body, but upper
body not so much. Okay. Um, we talked
about this Q angle thing. One of the
things that I've I'm really fascinated
by is there's been a big conversation
recently around ACL injuries in sport.
Yeah. And from reading your work, it
seems that and just doing some research
online, it seems that this increase in
women getting ACL injuries links
somewhat to this Q angle situation,
which again is the I don't know how to
explain it for someone that is listening
on audio and can't see, but I will link
it in this description. So, I highly
recommend you look at this picture cuz
the minute you see it, it makes a ton of
sense, but it's essentially like, and
this is me probably butchering it, as a
man, because my hips don't widen, my
legs are effectively quite straight.
Yep. So, from my hip down to my toes,
it's quite straight, which means that
I'm going to be more sturdy. Say if I
jump up in the air, when I land this, I
know this cuz my dad's an engineer, the
center of gravity being straight means
that I'm less likely to get injured. But
if you're Is that right right? Yeah.
Because your forces are going to be in a
more linear fashion. So you have more um
even distribution of the force through
the knee. Mhm. But for women, as you're
going to describe, our hips are wider.
So we have more of an angle to the knee
and the forces aren't distributed evenly
when we land. So when we look at that as
well as the quad dominance that develops
for women because quad dominance so that
means that we use our um front muscles
of our legs our quads a lot more than
our hamstrings our posterior chain. So
we don't use our glutes and our
hamstrings by default um as well as men
do. So, we're being pulled forward more
and we let we put more emphasis on the
front of our body. Mhm. Um because those
tend to take the the quads tend to take
the bulk of the muscle work that we're
trying to do unless we're really trying
to train hamstrings and glutes to fire,
which isn't the default for women's
bodies because center of gravity again
is lower and you tend to lean forward.
So, when we're looking at ACL injury,
again, it comes down to one, training
stress, two, mechanics, and if we're not
taught again how to land, how to run,
how to jump with the new angles, it
predisposes people to severe ACL injury.
And how much more likely is a woman to
have an ACL injury than a man?
it is a higher rate but the thing about
the research is that there hasn't been a
direct comparison because we hear
incidentally that women tear their ACL
and so we see a lot of observational
studies that women have torn their ACL
and we have lots of retrospective
studies that are going back to oh where
are we in our menstrual cycle when we
ACL but there hasn't been a definitive
comparison between men and women. If we
were to look at the current research, we
see a 3 to four to one ratio of ACL
tears of women versus men. So 3 to four.
So So either 3:1 or 4:1 depending on the
research that you look. So three women
for every one man or four women for
every one man.
Okay. So 300% difference. Yeah. Okay. So
interesting. I absolutely never knew
that. And in fact, it wasn't until I was
looking through your work that I I'd
seen um I went and did some research and
there's a big conversation online, a lot
of sort of news coverage around women's
football because it's I think it's the
fastest growing sport in the world. But
I read that this the probability that a
woman tears her ACL muscle is
significantly like hundreds of percent
more likely than a man because of this
in part because of this Q angle. in
professional sport is not as much as
when we're looking at recreational sport
because when we get into professional
sport we have specific warm-ups
especially for football um put out by
FIFA to prevent ACL tear to make sure
that you are actually properly warmed up
and engaging the right muscles and
learning how to stop pivot because it's
a it's a a mechanism in action usually
is a twisting angle. But if we're
looking at more age group or grassroots
sports because people aren't aware of
this Q angle, they aren't aware of the
quad dominance, women haven't been
taught again how to work with these new
mechanics. Then we're seeing a greater
incidence of ACL tear. 30 female
football players missed Women's World
Cup in 2023 due to ACL injuries,
including in the UK, Lioness, Beth
Meade, and Leah Williamson. Mhm. Which
is staggering to me. Yeah, it's very
high incidence. Y So, is there something
that can be done if you're a woman
that's exercising, that's doing things
like jumping and running and sprinting
and the fast sort of twitch uh sports,
is there something you can do to avoid
having an ACL injury? It's all about
being strong. So, if we're looking at
how what is the biggest thing for ACL
prevention? And I'll bring in one of my
PhD students just graduated looked at um
ACL rehab after surgery.
And it comes down to the definitive
difference between quad and hamstring
strength. So if we're looking at
improving the um strength capacity of
the hamstrings, then it offsets some of
the
default strength that the quads are
taking. So if we're able to balance it
from being front loaded to being more
even loaded, it comes down to, you know,
how we were talking about distribution
of forces through the knee with men
being more linear and women having an
angle. Well, if we're able to take that
angle and we can evenly distribute the
load between the muscles of the
hamstring and the quad, so the front and
the back, then it pulls the forces more
centrally. Okay. Which reduces the
stress of one point of contact. Got you.
So if we're developing the strength
through the whole posterior chain, we're
looking at glutes, we're looking at
hamstrings, we're doing a lot of calf
work and we can develop that whole
posterior part. It reduces the incidence
of being pulled in one direction and the
misalignment of forces. The other is the
cutting motion where we're looking at at
um lateral movement. So a lot of times
when we're looking at warm-ups and
you're observing on like kids sports,
there's not a lot of lateral
development. So if we're looking at at
um prevent prevention of ACL tear, we
have to work a lot of the explosive
lateral movements as well as jumping and
single length single leg jumping. And
these are things that aren't really done
in grassroots. But as we start to get
more into professional sport, it's
becoming more and more apparent that we
have to do specific mechanism of injury
prevention. So they're looking at the
sport. We're a football player. We have
a high incidence of ACL potential. So,
we have to really develop our posterior
chain. We have to work on our power for
our lateral movements, our step and our
jump. Um, so this is part of what FIFA's
put in for the warm-up because there is
such a draw. And as you were saying that
33 women in the World Cup tore their
ACL. Part of it is loading, part of it
is a little bit maybe overtrained before
they go into the World Cup, but a lot of
it has to do with um this imbalance
between the muscles and now having to
address it. Did science just look at
women as
a different version of men? Like sorry,
did they just look at women as like a
smaller version of men? Is that what how
they looked? Yeah, for the most part
because I mean a lot of the stuff when I
was going through school and even now
textbooks. So, I was standing in the
metro in DC uh a few months ago and
there was a young girl who has just
gotten into exercise physiology and I
overheard a conversation and she was
talking about some of the experiments
that they were doing but it never she
never talked about like we have to make
uh you know we're doing women specific,
we're doing men's specific and I asked
her I was like has anyone you know
talked to you about how women's bodies
are different than men's from angles and
muscle morphology? And she's like, "No,
what are you talking about?" I was like,
"This is a second year in X-Viz." Now,
if you look at the textbooks, it's still
a representation of men in the textbook
with regards to images. You have him or
they. You never have her. They might
have a very small section in there about
the female athlete, but usually it's
about the female athlete and anemia or
relative energy deficiency in sport.
It's never about how we can empower
women to use their bodies and their
physiology to their advantage and it's
what almost 2025 now.
Is there any element of it of people
being too scared to talk about
differences in physiology amongst men
and women? I don't think so. I mean I
always explain it from historical
perspective when we're looking at the
history and when we started seeing the
modernization of medicine medicine prior
to the modernization of medicine it used
to be women who are the caretakers if
you're thinking about you get sick you
go and someone has an herbal remedy for
you but when we started medicalizing and
becoming more nuanced in the medical
education women were excluded. So when
we start looking at at the origins of
medicine and who was in the room, it was
men. We start looking at the origins of
science and science development, it was
men. So all the scientific experiments
and everything have always been a
default to men. We look at AI now and
they're learning from algorithms based
on male data. So even now, healthc care
is still heavily maleoriented.
So when we start looking at why women
haven't been included or why women have
been generalized to male data, it's just
been the nature of how things have
developed. Now that we're aware of it
and now we have more research money
coming into women's health, we're
starting to see a change. And part of
the two definitive moments in healthc
care research that really invoked this
change. One was when we started seeing a
lot of incidences with ambient and the
dosage of medicines where women were
getting into a lot of accidents, car
accidents after they taken ambient
because it was still in their system the
next morning. It's ambient. It's a sleep
aid. Okay. It's a a prescription
strength sleep aid. So then people are
like, whoa, what's going on here? Oh,
the dosage for 180 pound man is the same
as 120 pound woman. And we also know
that there's differences in body
composition and metabolism. So a 180lb
man can take this dose and be fine in
the morning. But 120 lb woman can't take
that same dose and be fine in the
morning. And then we have COVID and the
outcomes of um long COVID and the
differences between the sexes with
regards to women ended up with more long
COVID, men ended up dying. So then in
during the COVID time period, people
were like, whoa, there's sex differences
in the outcomes of this disease. We have
to really start looking at that. So
there are slow things that are really
impactful on society that now people are
starting to step and say, wait, we have
to really look at women as women. We
have to look at men as men.
And is there an element of hormones
impacting injury at all? There's always
an in an impact of hormones when we're
looking at the overlay of hormones and
sex hormones and then the protocols that
have been developed, they don't take
into account estrogen, progesterone, and
to some extent testosterone. So, if
we're looking at injury and the way that
estrogen makes more um laxidative
ligaments. So, that means that our
ligaments become more lax when estrogen
comes up, which is why people assume
that around ovulation is when people
will have more ACL tears. It's not
because we also see that progesterone
comes in and can have a different effect
on the tendons. But that isn't accounted
for in a lot of of the protocols that
are out there for training and
prevention of overtraining. We see that
when we're looking at male and
testosterone, there tends to be the more
testosterone, the better for developing
muscle and recovery, but that's not
necessarily true either. So there's
nuances in the socioultural idea around
sex hormones that also impact on our
actual guidelines and protocols. If a
man and a woman came to you and said, "I
want to lose weight." They said, "I'm
200 lb um and I'd like to lose some
weight." Would you give them different
advice on what to do? Absolutely.
Absolutely would. And it comes down to a
lot of we see this on social media all
the time, calories in, calories out,
right? So when we're looking at calories
in, calories out, that idea of that
algorithm can work well in men. And the
reason for that is the hypothalamus. So
if we're looking at the hypothalamus,
which is an area in the brain that
controls appetite, it also controls our
endocrine system. So for men, they don't
have as many of what we call our kispin
neurons activated. So this is uh neurons
that are responsible for when we have
nutrients coming in, they fire and
they're like, "Yeah, okay. We got enough
nutrition coming in that we can now
accommodate for developing muscle and
losing body fat." For women, we have
more areas that are very sensitive
sensitive to to nutrient density. So
when I say this, when we're talking
about
uh four grams of carbohydrate that come
in and say they're carbohydrate from
fruit and veg, not from ultrarocessed
stuff, those four grams of carb will
affect the bodies differently between
being a man and a woman. For a man, this
four grams of carb coming in primarily
will go blood sugar and then be stored
as liver, muscle, glycogen. For women,
it's blood sugar. it doesn't get stored
because for women in order to store
muscle um and liver glycogen you have to
have an activation of uh some enzymes
from the liver as well as some enzymes
within the skeletal muscle itself to say
yeah okay we want to store this we don't
want to circulate it so then we start
looking at how the brain is perceiving
that so if the brain is saying yeah we
can store this because there's still
enough muscle tissue around there's
still enough blood glucose that we can
keep going and we can survive survive
the day. But for women, it sits there.
The blood glucose sits there and when it
starts being used, the hypothalamus is
like, "Okay, where's the extra food
that's coming in so we can keep going
and countering the stress that's coming
in?" And the best way from a numbers
perspective to look at it is when we are
looking at calorie, baseline calorie
intake just to exist and not get into
any kind of endocrine or hormone
dysfunction and appetite dysfunction.
For men, it's 15 calories per kilogram
of fat-free mass. For women, it's 30.
So, we start to see men do really well
on things like fasted training. We see
men do really well on calorie
restriction because the hypothalamus is
not as sensitive to lower calorie intake
or to low carb intake or to high protein
and um high fat intake. But for women,
because the hypothalamus has more areas
that are sensitive to nutrient density.
What does that mean? Sorry, I'm not even
sure what the hypothalamus is. So, the
hypothalamus is an area in the brain.
Yeah. And it's sensing. So, you have
blood that circulates through the brain.
It senses temperature, how hot your your
blood is. Like the thermostat or
something of the body. Yeah. Okay. So,
it's Yeah, it is a thermostat. It's the
appetite control center. It's how your
body responds to salt, how your body
responds to protein, carbohydrate, do I
need more, do I need less? So, it's it's
like the control center for the most
part. So, for women who come in and
they're doing fasted training, the
hypothalamus is like, "Wait a second, we
don't have any blood sugar. We don't
have enough carbohydrate to actually do
this kind of training." So, what I'm
going to do is I'm going to create a
little bit of dysfunction here and I'm
going to start downturning all the other
systems that need the same kind of fuel
because I don't have enough just to do
these muscle contractions. So, that
means you could end up losing muscle.
Absolutely. So, if a woman comes to me,
it's like, I want to lose weight and
I've been doing fasted training. I get
up, I have a black coffee, I go to the
gym, I do my lifting, I do some of my
cardio. So, my girlfriend does exactly
that. and then I'm not that hungry
because I did a hard workout at the gym.
I might have a protein recovery shake
and then I'll hold off eating my first
meal until noon. I always turn to them
and go, "Well, why did you go to the
gym?" Because all you've effectively
done is burn through your lean mass.
Your body needs to have some fuel and
the first thing that goes is lean mass
because it's a very active component of
the body. So, it would be better for you
as a woman to have maybe 15 grams of
protein if you're going to do strength
or 15 grams of protein with 30 gram of
carb, which isn't a lot before you go do
cardio and strength because this is just
enough to raise your blood sugar to
circulate to the hypothalamus that yes,
there's some nutrition coming in. I'm
able to get that blood sugar working.
I'm able to get that blood sugar into
the muscle. I'm able to stimulate the
mitochondria in the muscle to actually
use some more free fatty acids. I'm a
able to tell the liver that I can
actually get through this and use these
free fatty acids instead of storing
them. It only takes a little bit of food
to then have benefit for what you're
doing. For a man, if he's like comes in,
I have a black coffee, I go to the gym,
I do my strength, I might do a little
cardio, I have my protein afterwards,
and then I might delay my meal. like
that's all right because you have a
longer window for recovery. The
hypothalamus isn't as sensitive. You're
not burning through lean mass. You're
developing a stress on the body and we
know that it's really good that you had
that protein post exercise because
that's going to create some muscle
protein synthesis and hold you over till
you have your meal. Okay. So, I'm going
to try and explain this to you um like
I'm a 10-year-old, which is the exact
level of IQ I have on this subject
matter. So, you've got this hypothalamus
in the brain, which is basically this
sensor. It's trying to figure out, make
sure everything is in I'm trying to
think of that big word that someone
taught me.
Homeostasis. Homeostasis. Everything is
level, right? Yeah. And a woman's
hypothalamus is more sensitive. So if my
partner wakes up, goes to the gym, has
her black coffee, goes to the gym, does
a big workout as she always does, her
body, her hypothalamus is going to
panic a little bit more because it's
going to assume that there's stress on
the body now and it's going to look
around to see if it has sufficient blood
glucose levels. And it's and it's not
going to because she's not had anything
for a while. She's not going to have the
sufficient blood glucose levels. So,
it's going to start burning her lean
muscle mass. Exactly. Which means that
she's she's essentially going to it's
like one step forward, one step back.
Right. Super simplified. For a guy has
his black coffee in the morning, goes to
the gym, does the workout, the body
looks, and because the hypothalamus is
less sensitive, it's less requiring of
there to be higher blood sugar levels,
doesn't care as much. So, it's going to
it can also tap more into our liver and
muscle glycogen stores. So, it's going
to say, "Yeah." Okay. Well, we have a
little bit of blood glucose. We need a
little bit more. So, let's tap into
those stores and pull them out. So, it's
less reluctant to go straight for my
lean muscle mass. Exactly. It has an
alternative fuel source.
That's interesting. And what's the
evolutionary story of this? Why why does
this make sense? When we look tribally
like there and I might get hit by some
sociologists are like wait this isn't
completely true but for the exception
there are some tribes that didn't fit
into this but for the general idea from
a biological evolutionary standpoint
when we had times of low calorie intake
so we had to go find the beast or we had
to go out and find calories. It was at a
disadvantage for the woman to be
pregnant or to have a baby an extra
mouth to feed. So in times of low food
intake, the reproductive system or the
endocrine system of a woman would wind
down. So she would become amenoric or
lose her menstrual cycle for a while.
But it didn't affect men in that same
way because they had to lean up and get
fitter and faster because they had to go
fight the beast or they had to go find
the calories and bring it back. So, when
we're looking from that evolutionary
standpoint, in times of low calorie
intake or low food intake, a woman's
body will start to conserve and wind
down because it thinks that there's a
famine coming. But for men, they're not
as sensitive and the body's like, "Oh,
not a lot of calories coming in. That
must mean there's a fight that I have to
prepare for. So, I'm going to lean up.
I'm going to address all of my fuel
systems so that I can tap into all these
alternative fuel systems so that I will
have the energy to be able to go and
fight the beast to bring the calories
back. Mhm. So when there's adequate
calories available, we see that women
will lean up. They'll become uh more
acutely aware. Cognitive function comes
up. Carbohydrates are really important.
So we see that there is a development of
egg maturation. we have better endocrine
pulse. So that means that our hormones
that pulse on a daily basis, they
actually have the full pulse um and
return to baseline to encourage the body
to have a really robust endocrine
system. So that's thyroid, that's our
menstrual cycle, it's all the things.
But when we start pulling the calories
back, all that stuff winds down. So what
does that say about fasting?
So this is the big debate, right? So we
look at fasting and where it first came
out and it's like okay we see that obese
sedentary individuals who had to lose
weight rapidly for surgery they're put
on a fasting type program to lose weight
quickly in order to survive surgery. And
unfortunately a lot of the times we look
at clinical research and it gets
transposed over to health and fitness
without actually asking if it's viable.
So then we look at the lower end of the
fitness population, people who are just
learning to move and wanting to move and
like I also want to lose more body fat
so that I can move better. Oh, I'll
start fasting. And when we see a lot of
the like push on it, it comes from male
data again. So when we start looking at
women and a lot of women used to come
with their partners to see me and say,
"I don't understand. We're both doing
the same kind of fasted training. He's
leaning up and getting fitter. I'm
putting weight on and getting slower.
I'm like, okay, well, we have to
separate it out, right? If you're a
woman and you want to fast for all the
health reasons that we hear about with
regards to telmir length, improving
longevity, improving our body's
metabolic control. Then we work with our
circadian rhythm where we stop eating at
at dinner. So, we have dinner, we don't
eat 2 to three hours before bed. We have
that overnight fast. And then you want
to have food within a half an hour of
waking up to blunt that cortisol peak
that's natural upon waking. For men, you
can have variations of fasting. You can
do intermittent fasting, you can do a
warrior fasting, and you can still have
benefit. But for women, when we look at
the data, and if we were to do a warrior
fast, which is a 20-hour fast, 4-hour
eating window, for men, we see more
parasympathetic drive. So, they get that
more focused They have better blood
glucose control. They get uh an
acceleration of body fat loss. They
become more metabolically flexible,
meaning their body's able to transfer
between carbohydrate and fat
utilization. For women, it doesn't
happen that way. For women who do a
warrior fast, so that's a 20our
uh fasting and 4hour eating window. They
end up with less blood sugar control. We
have higher resting blood glucose. We
have more fat storage. we have more
sympathetic drive. So that means the
body's under stress and you're not going
to be able to sleep or recover well and
we see a downturn of the thyroid within
4 days of doing this. So when we're
looking at the data of fasting again,
it's pulling from the men and
generalizing to the women. But when we
start really looking and narrowing it
down and looking at female specific
data, the type of fasting that's out
there in the health and fitness world is
not appropriate for women.
But you would say that the sort of
overnight fast
eating dinner at a earlier time at 6 7
6:00 and then eating breakfast when you
wake up at say 8 in the morning or 9 or
something 6 or 7. What about the like
3-day fast you hear about to get into
like autophagy or whatever is? Exercise
is a stronger stimulus for autophagy
than fasting because if we look at
exercise in itself is a fasting state.
What happens during exercise? You start
exercising, your body is trying to
provide fuel. So, it's breaking down
fat. It's breaking down glucose. It's
breaking down amino acids. It's also
creating in a recovery standpoint a
boost of growth hormone, a boost of
testosterone in both men and women that
creates the cell cleanup, which is
autophagy. Right? So, if we're looking
at the difference between fasting and
exercise, exercise is a stronger stress.
All the things that we hear about
fasting and longevity, exercise does the
same. It's a stronger stimulus for it.
But the problem is we've become a lazy
society and people think exercise is too
hard. As an exercise physiologist, it
breaks my heart to see people who are
struggling to walk down the street
because we are so used to being
conditioned to a certain temperature in
a room to having a car automatic opener
or Uber come so we don't have to walk
down the road. And I bring up that movie
Wall-E from the early 2000s with the
little robot who's like wandering around
society and you see all these people on
these floating beds watching a screen
and one of the guys gets kicked off by
Wall-E accidentally falls down. He can't
get up and he's looking around going,
"What? Why can't I get up? What what's
going on?" I'm like, that's today's
society where people are are not able to
actually pull their own body weight
around for a significant amount of time
because it feels too difficult. Whereas,
if we look at all the stuff that comes
out with nutrition and all the trends
that come out with nutrition from
fasting to carnivorous diet to, you
know, the oldfashioned paleo, all these
things that people are trying to do, we
turn to exercise and we change the
modalities of exercise. Are we doing
intense exercise? Are we doing low
intensity? Are we doing resistance
training? Are we doing cardio? What are
we doing? All of these things in
exercise are significantly stronger
stress on the body that create more
adaptive changes than all these crazy
diets, but people find exercise too hard
or they don't have time. So, if I in
that example where a man and woman come
to you, you would you wouldn't recommend
the woman to fast in the same way that
you'd recommend a man to fast. Is there
any differences that you'd recommend in
training if they were if their goal was
to lose weight? Yep, absolutely. So,
when we're looking at regardless of age
for women because we see that women
don't age in a linear fashion like men.
So, we had definitive points. We have
puberty, we have our reproductive years,
we not have pregnancy in there, we have
pmenopause, we have postmenopause. Each
one of those is a different hormone
profile that it can affect the way we
train. for men, you know, you just kind
of go and we start to see a decline of
testosterone, we get into our late 50s.
So, we're talking about women and
training. If someone is coming in and
they're in their mid30s and they're
like, I want to lose weight. Okay,
resistance training. If someone comes in
and they're in their mid-40s and
pmenopause, resistance training doesn't
matter. Resistance training is key for
mobilizing abdominal fat and for
creating more lean mass and also
increasing the amount of cross talk
between their skeletal muscle and our
stored fat through little things called
myioines which are hormone signals that
are released during exercise and
released from the skeletal muscle. So if
we say okay let's do resistance training
to really recmp the body we also want to
increase our protein intake because we
see if you're doing resistance training
with a higher protein intake then we
have complete remp over the course of 12
weeks and it's a very powerful
motivating tool for women because for
the most part women have been
excommunicated from the strength world
until recently it wasn't kosher for
women to have a lot of muscles we see
like I grew up in the '9s with the
supermodels that were super skinny,
right? It wasn't kosher for women to be
in the gym lifting weights. But we see
this evolution change. And so we're
starting to see more research come out
in women in resistance training. And
it's so imperative for body composition
change to invoke that resistance
training. What about a Zmpeek? A Zimp.
Yeah. So I find it interesting because
of all the impact it's having on society
and it is a very powerful tool. The
problem with it is no one is being
necessarily taught how to come off it.
So if we look at osimp and how powerful
the GPL1 is, we see it does invoke an
appetite switch where it mutes the
appetite. It dampens cravings. So we see
as rapid weight loss, but the rapid
weight loss is lean mass. So that comes
back to the wallally picture where you
can't get up because you don't have lean
mass. I fear for society who doesn't
have the opportunity to learn how to
come off it through proper strength
training, exercise modalities, and
nutrition to support the weight loss
that comes with those impecc. It's
absolutely brilliant tool. is absolutely
a brilliant tool, but we're falling on
the behavior change. If we were to
really teach people how to create that
behavior change while they're using the
tool, then they can come off it and not
be afraid of putting weight back on.
Okay. So, would you recommend it for
your for people that come to see you or
ask you for advice? No, because most of
the people that come to see me have
those 10 vanity pounds they want to
lose. I call them vanity pounds because
they're the ones that creep up and you
can instigate little changes within the
daily life to actually lose them and
keep them off. For people who are
struggling who have severe obesity,
they're pre-diabetic, they have other
medical conditions and exercise is
definitely in the too hard basket
because they get breathless just getting
up out of their chair. We need to lose
some weight first so that we can then
implement some of the adaptive changes
of exercise. And do you think women
should be eating immediately after they
exercise and men or is it does it is
there a variance there at all? There is
a variance because when we look at um
what we call metabolism coming back down
to baseline. So that's your overall body
coming back down to its resting state.
For women it happens within 30 to 40
minutes after exercise. For men it's 2
to 18 hours depending on the intensity.
So in that we see that if we want to
maximize our body's resistance training
and muscle building capacity, we need to
give it some food. We need to give it
some really good hit of protein. For
women who are in their reproductive
years, we see 35 grams of protein post
exercise within 45 minutes will tip the
muscle into muscle protein synthesis.
For men, it's 20 grams and it can be
two, four, whatever hours later. When
we're looking at returning our muscle
glycogen back to normal, we don't need
as much carbohydrate post exercise as a
woman as men need more because they tap
more into their stores. So the window of
opportunity for women post exercise is
around that 45 minute mark, but for men
it's open a lot wider. What about the
keto diet for women?
I am kind of anti- keto for both sexes.
And I say this because when we look at
the gut microbiome, that is so
important. We see a decrease in
diversity as we become more and more I
guess city dwelling and we are having
less and less of uh variety in our food
chain. We have to take care of the gut
microbiome. If we look at the ketogenic
diet and the high fat intake that comes
with it, it significantly decreases that
gut microbiome diversity, which reduces
the body's ability to synthesize
vitamins, to produce serotonin, to have
this conversation between the gut and
the brain. And for women, we're already
metabolically flexible by the nature of
being born with more of those endurance
fibers that there's no reason to try to
do a ketogenic diet. Could I not take a
prebiotic or something or just eat more
fruits and veggies and stuff? So, if
you're eating a lot of fruit and
veggies, sorry, not fruit, veggies. No,
if you're eating a lot of fibrous fruit
and veg, then that's how we increase the
diversity. Taking a probiotic pill, it
just affects the upper intestines. But
even that is a little bit suspect
because there's only two to three
companies that are making all the
probiotics that are B2B. So that means
business is business and we don't really
know the long-term outcome and we can
have the overgrowth of some probiotics
that again can cause some dispiosis.
Could I be on the keto diet and still
protect my gut microbiome?
I don't think so. Not from what I've
seen. Cuz I thought the gut microbiome
was predominantly about like plants.
It is. But you also need some protein
that comes from a wide variety of
different sources. And the amount of fat
that is taken in through a true
ketogenic diet is 70 to 80% of your
total intake coming from fat. And then
that will cause the overgrowth of the
bacteria that relies primarily on fatty
acids, which downregulates all the good
bacteria that relies on our fibrous
fruit and veg. because you're not going
to be able to consume as much fiber as
you need on a ketogenic diet to really
invoke this diversity. For thinking
about invoking diversity, you want 30
different plants across the week. And on
a ketogenic diet, you're just not
capable of being able to eat as much to
create that diversity. And the reason
why it's really important for women to
have that diversity is because we have
some gut bugs that are responsible for
our sex hormone metabolism. So, we think
about estrogen, progesterone. People
think, "Oh, yeah, well, it's released
from the ovaries and the adrenals and it
goes and it hits our target tissues."
But we have this thing called a second
pass where our sex hormones will be
taken up by the liver, bound by sex
hormone binding globulin, shot into the
intestines through bile, unconjugated or
unpacked by these little gut bugs, and
then shot back out in the circulation to
work. If we have a lower diversity of
the gut microbiome, we don't have those
bugs that will help with our sex
hormone. um I guess reactivation and the
ability for the sex hormones to work
optimally.
What about things like sauners and cold
plunges? Yeah. Is there a difference of
variance there between men and women?
Absolutely. So if we're looking at cold
plunge and it's all the rage, right? So
we're seeing let's get into ice water.
It's going to invoke this massive
parasympa parasympathetic response. I'm
going to have lots of cognition and
focus. It's going to create a hormonal
response that improves my blood glucose.
It's going to invoke a lot of autophagy
and all the things that we see with
fasting as well. And it gives me this
incredible sense of being in control.
Male data. We look at women who are in
ice bath. It's too cold to invoke those
responses. And the reason for that is we
have differences in um our skin
sensation between men and women in with
regards to thermmorreulation. So women
have more um subcutaneous fat. So more
fat under the skin and we tend to vasoc
constrict and vasoddilate first. So that
means that um blood vessels will
constrict tightly and then we'll start
to have some internal changes or if
we're too hot we'll vasoddilate first
and then we'll have internal changes to
create sweating. So we look at a cold
plunge there's too much constriction and
it becomes too much of a threat to women
and their bodies don't have the same
response to ice water. We see that 15 to
16° C or around 55° F is optimal
temperature for women to experience the
same effect that men have with ice. So
there's a sex difference in the
temperature to invoke the same response
between cold water um immersion
responses. In the sauna, everyone
responds.
And we see that the adaptation for sauna
is different again for men and women
because for women with the difference of
the vasoddilation in the heat before
they start sweating, it takes a longer
time for core temperature to come up. So
women can spend more time in the heat
before they start to get changes in
their hormone responses and blood volume
adaptations. For men, they can go in and
I kind of laugh. My husband will come in
with me in the sauna and I'll sit there
for like 10 minutes. I'm not sweating
yet and he's like pouring. He's like, I
got to get out. And it takes me like 20
or 30 minutes in order to get the same
response. So when we look at the the
actual research and data that looks at
acclimatization and looks at sauna
invoking changes, we see again that
women need more time both long longer
time for an acute bout and longer time
across the weeks in order to get the
same cardiovascular adaptations as men.
Interesting. Didn't realize that. A
typical ice bath is what temperature?
It's what? Minus 1 or something. Or is
it I think it's 0 to 4° C. Oh, okay. 0
to 4. Okay. So, you're saying that a
woman should be nearer 15. Mhm. For the
same benefits. Mhm. Yep. At my company,
Flight Studio, which is part of my
bigger company, Flight Group, we're
constantly looking for ways to build
deeper connections with our audiences,
whether that's a new show, a product, or
a project. It's why I launched the
conversation cards. I've relied on
Shopify before, who's a sponsor of
today's podcast, and I'll be using them
again for the next big launch, which
you'll hear about soon. And I use them
because of how easy it is to set up an
online store that reaches all of you, no
matter where you are in the world. With
Shopify, the usual pain points of
launching products online disappear
completely. No matter the size of your
business, Shopify has everything you
need to make your business go to the
next level and better connect with your
customers all over the world. To say
thank you to all of you for listening to
my show, we're giving you a trial, which
is just $1 a month. You can sign up by
going to shopify.com/bartlet.
That's shopify.com/bartlet
or find the link in the description
below. One of the um conversations I had
with my partner last year at New Year's
Eve was about creatine. Yeah. Um, I had
it had some with me on the counter in
our in our home and we were away from
home and I said to her, I said, "Oh, you
should take some." And her response was,
"No, that's not for women." And she went
on to explain that she felt it was for
effectively like bodybuilders. Yeah. And
that it would like put on weight. And I
was like, I don't think that's true. I
said, some people on my podcast have
told me that that everyone should be
taking it. And so we sat there and
Googled it. and after googling it for a
couple of um minutes, she was like
scooping it into her drink as fast as
she possibly could. But there is a
prevailing narrative here. Actually,
before you came, I asked AI a couple of
questions about women's perceptions on
creatine and the number one thing was
women thought that it would gain muscle
and gain weight and they thought it was
um for bodybuilders. Yep. That is the
prevailing myths surround creatine. And
what's the expression people use? The
dose or the poisons in the dose, right?
So that's part of the creatine. So if
we're looking at the bodybuilding set
and how it increases muscle capacity and
training status, so if we're using a lot
of creatine, the dosing for bodybuilding
is five grams four times a day with one
gram of carbohydrate. And we see that
creatine helps store water within the
muscle with glycogen. And we want that
for muscle performance because the idea
of being able to train harder with
creatine is to enhance the amount of of
enzymes that are available for muscle
contraction. And creatine is part of the
buffering system of that. If we're
looking at creatine for health and for
women, the dose is 3 to 5 grams only
once a day without carbohydrate. And the
reason for that is women have around 70%
of the stores that men have by the
nature for the most part don't eat as
much creatine fil food as men and we see
that we use it for a lot of our fast
energetics. So like for our gut health,
for our brain health um and then also
for muscle performance. So, if we're
having women take three to five grams
once a day, it does not have the same
side effects as the bodybuilding set of
taking five grams four times a day.
Yeah. Because on the label, it tells me
to take it a few times a day. Yeah. You
don't have to. And it says about
loading. So, this is all the
bodybuilding stuff, right? So, if you
want to load, we see a loading protocols
over the course of two weeks and you're
starting to really saturate the body
with those five grams four times a day.
But for women, we see that 3 to five
grams will fully saturate the body over
the course of three weeks. So that means
that all our fast energetics, like I
said, our gut, um, the intestines, and
we're looking at the integrity of the
intestinal cells and the mucosal lining,
and we see that there is a greater
incidence of GI distress in women. I
think it's something like a 5:1 ratio of
women to men having GI distress running.
And it has to do with estrogen, but also
has to do with what we call the mucosal
lining of the intestines. So we want to
maintain the integrity of the mucosal
lining. And creatine is really important
for that. So if we're looking at
saturating the body over 3 weeks with 3
to 5 grams, we improve that integrity.
So we have less GI distress. We also see
that there have been randomized control
trials looking at u mood and with
specifically with regards to depression
and anxiety and women who are taking
three to five grams of creatine
will come out of a depressive episode
more so than women who are just using an
SSRI. So it's really important for brain
metabolism.
And when we're looking at that whole
loading strategy for men, that's all
about muscle performance. It's not about
gut health. It's not about brain health.
about muscle performance.
Just looking at some studies, creatine
supplication, creatine supplementation
for both men and women enhances muscle
strength, increases lean muscle mass,
improves highintensity exercise
performance. Yep. Improves recovery, has
potential cognitive benefits, and
supports in neurodeenerative diseases.
Yes. So Abby Smith Ryan is a colleague
out of UNCC and she's done a lot of work
in creatine for women. Um, and yes, we
see that there is an improvement in
muscle capacity because you're
increasing the amount of buffer that's
available for muscle contractions, but
it doesn't have to be the same loading
dose as men. If you are looking for
performance enhancement because you want
to improve a training block or you're in
physique building or you're going to do
something like high rocks and you need
to have greater muscle capacity, you
might want to try the loading strategy.
Yes, you will gain water weight because
you're also storing more within the
muscle. But for the general woman who's
looking for health and performance
benefits, you don't have to do a loading
strategy. You just have to do that 3 to
five grams a day. That loading strategy,
for anyone that doesn't know, is
basically some of the creatine boxes
will tell you the labels will say for
the first week or two weeks, whatever,
have a huge dosage of it, and then
thereafter you can kind of ease down the
dosage. M but I think that's kind of
been debunked as something that we all
need to do in all cases. Yeah. Are there
any other supplements that you recommend
women to take based on the way that we
live our lives and the food that we eat?
Vitamin D. Okay. Um and why and what
does that do? So if we're looking at
vitamin D, especially vitamin D3, what's
the difference? So you have vitamin D2
and vitamin D3. Vitamin D2 is more of a
storage form. It's not converted to
being a functional form. So if you take
D3, it's already a functional form. So
that means your body is going to take it
in and use it as it should be. So we're
looking at a vitamin D3 supplement. Then
we are able to boost circulating levels
of vitamin D3 or vitamin D that's usable
and it's used for every system in the
body. And it's really important now
especially I'm coming from the southern
hemisphere just out of winter. You're in
the upper parts of the northern
hemisphere in the middle of winter and
we don't get enough sun. And when we're
looking at now all the worries for skin
cancer, people are slip, slap, slop, you
know, sunscreen, hat, clothes, and we
don't get enough. And then if we're
looking at our food supply, there's not
a lot of proper vitamin D rich foods.
You're looking at mushrooms or fortified
dairy products. And those tend not to be
consumed a lot nowadays. So, if we're
improving the amount of vitamin D3 that
we're taking in and the amount of
vitamin D that's circulating, we have
better recovery. We have better muscle
function. We have better brain health.
We have pretty much every system is
affected in a positive way. Omega-3.
Yep. Omega-3s are good. Especially as we
get into perry and postmenopause, we
want to look at uh how inflammation
affects the cells. So, if we look at
using a really good vitamin or sorry, a
really good omega-3
um and omega uh I guess we're looking at
the types of omega-3s that are in there.
then we're enhancing cellular integrity
that our estrogen used to help with
anti-inflammatory properties. It's not
something that everyone needs to take.
It's something that we have to consider
when we start getting into our late 30s,
early 40s. Maybe get a blood test for
it. See how your omega-3 levels are and
then consider dosing with a really good
fish oil.
What about iron levels? Because I've had
a friend of mine who is a woman um tell
me that their iron levels were low.
This is common and we see that there's
the incidence of
a change in the
norms when we're looking at the
reference ranges.
And I find it really interesting that
the reference ranges that we have for
all of our blood markers are shifting to
a sicker population. What's that mean?
So if we're looking at the bell curve
and we're taking population data,
overall our society has become sicker.
So now we're seeing that the norms for
iron used to be a ferotin of 50 or lower
was considered low ferotin. Now it's 26
for women. We look at testosterone.
Lower testosterone now for men is
normal. And it is because that is just
what a sedentary population now
presents. But if someone is active and
comes to me and says, you know, I had my
iron tested and it's sitting at 26 and
they say that it's normal, but I feel
awful. It's like that is not normal. If
you were part of my high performance
athletic crew, we want to see minimum
50, preferably 100. So, we have to
supplement you to bring it up. And it's
a really specific area of how we
supplement. It's supplementing every
other day with a very high bioavailable
iron. And when we start looking at how
we are supplementing every other day
with either carbonyl or glycinate, then
we're really able to boost that ferotin
and people start to feel better. What
does iron do and how does someone who's
iron deficient feel? So iron is
responsible for that those hem groups
that I was talking about with oxygen
carrying capacity, hemoglobin, the
blood, the blood cells. Yeah. Their
blood cells. So iron is responsible for
allowing those hem groups to carry
oxygen. If we have low iron, then we
don't have enough oxygen circulating
throughout the body or being used by the
body. So you feel very flat, very tired.
You start to get really dark circles
under your eyes. Um it a mission to do
anything. So it's like a deadended
fatigue. And people are like this this
isn't stressoriented fatigue or jet lag
oriented fatigue. This is fatigue where
I can't even walk up the stairs without
getting winded. What foods have iron in
them or iron rich? So, primarily red
meat is where a lot of people turn to.
But if you are more plant-based, then we
look at leafy greens. We look at nuts
and seeds, but using a lot of vitamin C
with that, preferably adding um a little
bit of olive oil on our salads. uh maybe
cooking in an iron skillet to improve
the amount of iron that comes into the
food. And we also know that we have to
time it with what we call hepsidin or
hepsetin depending on where you come
from in the world. It's an enzyme that
decreases the body's availability of
iron absorption. It increases with
inflammation. So it's higher after
training for about 5 hours in men and in
reproductive women. And it can be
elevated for up to 24 hours in late
perry and early post-menopausal women.
So basically, how do I supplement?
Supplement before training or at night
away from training. When you think about
men's and women's diets, is there
anything to be aware of when we're
thinking about because you know, me and
my partner will sit down for dinner and
we share the food. Yeah. So we the food
comes out, we even when we go to a
restaurant, sometimes we'll order the
exact same thing and we'll both finish
it. Yeah.
Is that okay? Is it is it working for
you guys? I think part of the reason I
ask is when I did some um blood glucose
tests. Yeah. I think I I think if I
recall this correctly, my partner was
more sens glucose sensitive than me. And
I recall them telling me that women are
have a greater blood sugar sensitivity
than men. So this is the interesting
part. So when we're looking at blood
glucose and insulin sensitivity,
it changes across the menstrual cycle.
So it depends on is she in the high
hormone phase or not. If she's in the
high hormone phase which is after
ovulation
uh we have more insulin resistance and
the reason for that is when progesterone
comes up it's trying to take in
everything as a building block for the
uterine lining. Insulin resistance what
does that mean? So insulin is the
hormone that that is
a signal for your muscles to uptake
glucose to store it. Okay. So it sends a
signal to grab the glucose out my blood,
store it, which brings my glucose levels
down. Exactly. Okay. Exactly. When
progesterone's in the picture, insulin
doesn't do its job very well. Okay.
Because pro progesterone wants to have
more carbohydrate available to be able
to then send it to the developing
uterine lining, the endometriosis,
because the endometriosis becomes a
really thick layer of
tissue that is really rich in glycogen.
So progesterone increases lean mass
breakdown or you increase your protein
intake to have more circulating amino
acids. It also makes your body less apt
to store glucose because it wants both
amino acids and glucose to build this
lush uterine lining. When we get into
pmenopause,
we have more insulin resistance because
there's confusion across all systems of
the body and the body is like, I don't
know if I'm going to need this glucose
or not, so I'm not going to store it.
And there's a misstep in the liver and a
misstep in the mitochondria
which is responsible for tapping into
using free fatty acids with
carbohydrate. So the body is having a
higher level of blood glucose because
the body doesn't know if it should store
it or not. So when your partner gets
tested depends on how old she is and
what phase of the menstrual cycle or if
she's well beyond that. So that the part
of the menstrual cycle where her
progesterone is highest is when she's
going to be most sensitive to sugar.
Exactly. And that is typically between
day 19 and 23 if she has a normal cycle,
a regular cycle or whatever. Well, the
caveat there is ovulation. Is she
ovulating or not? Okay. And
unfortunately, we're seeing in the
modern fertility literature that women
are having more and more anovulatory
cycles. But you won't necessarily know
that because you'll still have a bleed.
What's an an ovulatory cycle? You don't
ovulate. Why? They're looking at a lot
of the stress that's coming on today's
society, the food system, a lot of the
um I guess trendy diets that are out
there. A lot of women aren't eating
enough to support their immune or their
menstrual cycle function to allow the
egg to actually develop to then
instigate ovulation. And it's not just
in active women, it's across the board.
So, as it relates to this menstrual
cycle, 28 days, I'm going to put it on
the screen for anyone that doesn't
understand it, um, or doesn't know what
I'm referencing right now, but I'll also
link it below in the comments in the
description. Sorry. Um, 28 days long.
There's the early felicular stage, the
late felicular stage, the mid lutulu
lutio. It's exactly what I said. Yep.
And the late lutio phase. Yeah. Yeah.
Yeah. Yeah. As it relates to nutrition
and exercise. Yeah. How do I need to
adapt across these 28 days and why do I
need to adapt? So again, it comes down
to the ovulation. Right. So if we're
looking at the low hormone phase, so
that's your follicular phase. Day one to
six roughly. Yep. And even up to
ovulation, which is where? So around day
12 or 13 on 28 day cycle. So right at
that peak 12 to 13. Oh yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
there. So, this is where um the immune
system is really robust and we're really
resilient to stress and we can have a
lot of carbohydrate and protein intake
and we're not going to be that affected.
We're more sensitive to glucose. It's
going to be pulled into places it needs
to be. If we ovulate after ovulation,
like I said, progesterone comes up. It's
only produced if we ovulate because
progesterone is produced from the
breakdown of the housing of the egg.
Progesterone, like I said earlier, will
hold everything in the blood. It will it
will tell the body, we need more blood
glucose, and we need that glucose to
come to the endometrial lining. We also
need more amino acids. So, we're going
to break down lean mass or I'm going to
make this person crave more protein
oriented foods so that I can have amino
acids to come in. So, if we're looking
at adapting, right, the only real thing
that we need to be aware of is after
ovulation, if we're going to do a
highintensity workout, we need to make
sure that we have some more
carbohydrate. So, we're actually eating
before and after having some good
carbohydrate that comes in, which is
from day 14 onwards. Yep. So, from day
14 onwards, if we are going to do a lot
of high intensity workout or high um a
big workout, y then we need to just make
sure we're having more carbs. Yeah.
And then we have around a 12% increase
in our protein needs because we have a
higher amount of amino acids that are
needed. One, because we're developing
tissue, but two, we also have skeletal
muscle turnover that we need to keep up
with. Interesting.
So, is there any day in the cycle where
we shouldn't be working out hard? That's
individual. So, it used to be early days
when menstrual cycle research was coming
out. We saw on a molecular level that
the low hormone phase was where we could
really push it and we could really get
really good adaptations because our body
was really responsive to stress. Then
after ovulation, we see a fuel shift.
Like I said, progesterone is is really
conserving or pulling glucose away.
Estrogen's also sparing it and saying,
you know, you need to go to the uterine
lining. So, with the change of hormones,
we have a change our fueling system. We
also have a change in our core
temperature where it goes up by about
0.5 or 0.5 degrees Celsius or around 1°
Fahrenheit. So our heat tolerance isn't
as great. But because we're seeing more
and more an ovulatory cycles, we have to
rely on the woman to track her own
cycle, which is hard. Well, it doesn't
have to be as hard as what people think.
Okay? It's the nuance of how do I feel
today? So, I tell women instead of
really dialing it in and saying, "Oh,
well, I think I ovulated today, so that
means I should back it down." When you
go to the gym, use what we call
sessional rating of perceived exertion.
So, I tell people most of the time
you're going to go in, you're going to
have a physical and a mental, right?
Physical, how are you on a 1 to 10?
Mental, how are you on a 1 to 10? If
physically you're an eight and mentally
you're a two, warm up really well and
see if that mental capacity comes back
up. If not, then we're not going to push
too hard. We're not going to work on
technique because mentally you're just
not there. Physically, maybe you are. If
you go in and you're low on both of
them, then it's going to be a technique
and recovery day. You're not wasting
time at the gym. You're going to make it
work for you by really working slow
under the bar, nailing technique, not
getting the heart rate up so much. And
as we're going through and tracking how
we feel, we're going to start to see
patterns across our cycle. And we can
anticipate those patterns and say,
"Okay, well, I know on day 21 I always
feel flat. So, I'm not going to schedule
a highintensity workout that day. I'm
going to sleep in, maybe do some
mobility, recover, and really know that
I'm not going to nail it that day. So,
I'm not going to go push myself because
I don't want to beat myself up
mentally." Because women do this.
They're like, "I suck. I don't know
why." But it comes down to that
physiological variability. And for a
woman to track her own cycle, understand
her own nuances. If you're really on to
it and you know when you ovulate, then
you can take those molecular structures
into play where you know you can hit
your PR and you can really push it in
the low hormone phase. After ovulation,
you're going to switch it to more
endurance, maybe not so high intensity,
but more tempo type work. And then about
the four or five days before your period
starts where your immune system's more
compromised, you just kind of want to
dial it down, use it as D lo because we
can take the strength and conditioning
ideas of building up macro micro cycles
and de lo across the menstrual cycle. So
where in the cycle am I going to be
strongest if I'm a woman? So if we're
looking from a cognitive and a
physicality aspect, it's right around
where that estrogen starts to come up.
So around day six. Day six to about day
13. Day 13. Yeah. Okay. And where am I
going to be least strong? Theoretically
from about day 23.
Yeah. Yeah. Yep. As those hormones start
to come down. Yeah. To 28. Oh, okay. To
the very end. Okay. The very end. And
the variation of those hormones coming
down is what instigates a total
inflammatory response. So if we're
looking at inflammation which drives the
menstrual cycle to start the bleeding
phase, we have a change in our immune
system. Bleeding happens at 28 around
day 28. So we say bleeding is day one in
a cycle is day 28. Of course. Yeah. Day
one to day six typically. Okay. Fine.
Yeah. What questions should I be asking
about the menstrual cycle? Well, you
know the questions that are never asked
is like what is a typical menstrual
cycle? Yes, we have a textbook like from
1 to 28. That's very, very rare. Most
women have a cycle that might be 21 to
40 days. The bleed cycle is something
that's never talked about. What does a
bleed cycle look like? Is it really six
days? No. Every woman has a different
one. And if you're tracking what that
bleed is, maybe you have two heavy days,
a light day, and another couple of days
of spotting, and then a heavy day.
That's your norm. When you start having
changes in the norm, that's when you
want to look and say, "Am I getting into
low energy availability? Am I not
recovering well enough or am I in my
late 30s early 40s and I started getting
into pmenopause. The bleed pattern is so
important for people to understand
because that's how we have a true
inherent
identification of stress. So we see
changes in the bleed pattern as well as
the length of the menstrual cycle itself
when the body is not adapting to stress.
And stress isn't just our daily life
stress. It's exercise stress. And that
disruption could also be just not having
a a bleed. Yes. Because a lot of women
talk about that. They talk about having
irregular periods or just the period
didn't come this month. Is that often an
indicator of the body being under
stress. Yes. And that stress can be not
just a bad emails at work, but it could
be you're working out too much or
something. Yeah. Working out too much,
not eating enough is a big one. We've
done some really interesting research
looking at recreational female athletes.
So, people who go to the gym three or
four times a week, right? They're not
training specifically for anything but
life. Mh. And they tend to fall into
some of these trendy diets like fasted
training or maybe they're eating too low
carbohydrate because they're on a low
carb, highfat or high protein diet and
they're missing on the carbs. And again,
that interrupts the hypothalamus. So, we
call it low energy availability. when
someone isn't eating enough for the
hypothalamus to say, "Yeah, all of our
systems can work and we can adapt to
exercise." So, we see on the upwards of
55% of recreational female athletes in a
low energy state or subclinical low
energy state and it comes out as changes
in the bleed cycle or a missed period.
That's why I tell women, look, if you're
tracking, you can do sessional RP, but
really track that bleed pattern and the
length of the cycle because if you start
to see changes in the length and changes
in the bleed pattern or just changes in
the bleed pattern, it's an opportunity
for you to take a pause, say, what have
I done from a training perspective or a
sleep perspective or somehow increased
my stress that my body's not adapting
well? Because if we do that first then
we don't get into a clinical position of
amenorhea which is no menstrual cycle
and poor bone health and psychological
issues and things that all come with
endocrine dysfunction. Why is bone
health so important for women in
particular? When we see bone it is
driven by estrogen progesterone and an
interplay between estrogen progesterone.
we see a peak velocity or peak bone mass
hitting around the time we're 20ish and
then we'll start to degrade it if we're
not creating multi-directional
stress on the bone through jumping
through resistance training and if we
start to lose bone density and we become
osteopenic or osteoporitic meaning we
have very thin bones they break easily
and it's really really difficult for
someone who is in their reproductive
years to to be able to do all the things
they want to do if they don't have a
really strong robust skeletal system.
And this is why vitamin D is also so
important. Yes. Okay. And men and women
have different bone density. Yep. Men
have thicker bones and tend to not have
as much degragation of the bone because
they don't have estrogen progesterone
perturbations that are changing the
signaling to
increasing bone density or stopping the
growth of bone. Right? So women have
this perturbation throughout their
menstrual cycle that will change how
their bones are responding. And then
when we don't have a menstrual cycle or
we get put on an oral contraceptive
pill, we have changes in that signaling
which changes our bone density. And you
mentioned sleep a second ago. Yeah. How
is sleep relevant and what's the
variance between men and women as it
relates to sleep? Sleep's really
important because that's where we have
our parasympathetic drive and our
ability to recover. So the whole I
shouldn't say the whole reason because
nobody really knows why we need to sleep
other than the fact this is where our
physical and our mental capacities
become solidified. So that means that
our body fully repairs while we're
sleeping. Our memories get solidified.
Our brain becomes a little bit relaxed
and can repair itself while we're
sleeping. For women, we see changes
across the menstrual cycle in our sleep
phases. So when we are slow sleep phases
meaning our deep sleep versus our late
sleep versus our dream sleep and we need
to get in that really super deep sleep
in order to have optimal reparation.
When we are getting close to the bleed
phase then we see more interruption in
the sleep and it's really really
apparent for women who have really bad
PMS or uh other conditions that happen
to affect estrogen progesterone. We have
an increase in our core temperature from
progesterone. We have changes in
melatonin pulse because of of estrogen.
So when women are talking about having
really poor sleep right before their
menstrual cycle, it is because we have
these sex hormones that are interfering
with our sleep phases. For men, they
don't have that perturbation. For men,
we see that um chronologically they tend
to have a melatonin peak that's later
than women. So they tend to want to stay
up later and they can sleep in but they
can also have shorter sleeps. So there's
a chronobiology aspect that comes to it
with regards to how our body actually
falls asleep and wakes up. And there's a
sex difference in that chronobiology. Do
men or women suffer more with jet lag?
Women suffer more with jet lag. And if
so, why? Why is that? Because if we're
looking at our circadian rhythms and how
long they are, like I said, melatonin
peaks earlier for women than men and we
have a slightly different What does that
mean? Sorry, melatonin. So melatonin is
what allows our body to actually get
into sleep and our wind down for that is
melatonin production. So a lot of people
will start to feel really sleepy at like
4 in the afternoon, right? It's just a
natural occurrence. Our core temperature
comes up, we start to have melatonin
production. And for women, a melatonin
peak for sleep to for sleep onset hits
around 900 p.m. on average. For men,
it's about 10 or 11 p.m. because our
circadian rhythms are different. So
women are on a shorter side than men. So
if we're talking about jet lag, for
women going east, it's a little bit
easier because it's a shorter. For women
going west, it's a little bit harder
because it's longer. So there's a
difference. Men will do better going
west and worse going east. Women go
better east than going west.
Quick one. I want to tell you about a
new health product/gadget that's had a
big impact on my life, but also my
partner's life. They are a sponsor of
this podcast, and me and my partner are
both quite obsessed with it. Now, it is
the Bon Charge infrared sauna blanket.
Have you ever heard of an infrared sauna
blanket before? Infrared sauna blankets
are designed to give you the exact same
benefits of infrared sauners that you
find at gyms and spas and health clubs,
but they're portable. You can use them
at home. You can use them when you
travel and anywhere in between. It heats
the body directly rather than the air
around you. And for me, when I use the
Bon Charge infrared sauna blanket before
I sleep, my sleep scores go up. I'm
better recovered the next day when I go
to the gym because it helps with
circulation and stiffness and muscle
soreness. But also, infrared is
associated with really improving your
skin. They are a sponsor of this podcast
and because of that, they've offered all
of you listeners a 25% discount when you
try Bon Chargers infrared sauna blankets
today. To get that discount, use the
code diary at checkout and you'll also
get free shipping and a year-long
warranty. Head to bondcharge.com/diary
and get started on your infred sauna
journey today. When it comes to food, I
trust my gut and I trust Zoe, a business
I'm an investor in and today's sponsor
of this podcast. All the nutritionists
I've spoken to have highlighted just how
misleading information is out there when
it comes to food. Take healthy halos.
The claims you see on packaging that say
things like low sugar and nothing
artificial are often a sign of foods to
avoid. Have you ever noticed a health
claim on fresh fruit? You probably get
my point. Understandably, there's loads
of distrust out there. Who should you
turn to for accurate information? I use
Zoey, which is backed by one of the
world's largest microbiome databases and
most scientifically advanced atome gut
health tests. Zoey gives you proven
science whenever you need it. As a Zoey
member, you'll get an athome test kit
and personalized nutrition program to
help you make smarter food choices that
support your gut. To sign up, visit
zoey.com and use my code steen10 for 10%
off your membership. That's zoie.com
code Steven10. Trust your gut. Trust
Zoe.
Use this term chronobiology. Mhm. I have
no idea what that word means, but that's
the biology of our chrono circadian
rhythm. Yeah. Okay. Yeah. Yeah. And is
there anything else that men and women
should understand about our
chronobiology
that's pertinent to making sure that
we're high performing and healthy? Yes.
So this comes down to our hormone and
pulses throughout the day. So we see
that cortisol which everyone talks about
as being a bad thing. It's not a bad
thing. We have a peak about a half an
hour after we wake up. And for women we
need to eat in order to dampen that
peak. For men it just naturally dampens.
So you don't need the food to instigate
dampening of that peak. We see a
luteinizing hormone pulse in both men
and women. But the um amplitude of that
pulse is greater in women because it's
responsible for how our body responds to
developing an egg so that it can be
fertilized. We also see estrogen pulses
again to pulse throughout the day and
then throughout the week before we can
come to one of those estrogen peaks. So
our body is is aligned for these pulses
and we have a 20ish 24ish hour clock and
within that we have cellular clocks. So
we have a cellular clock that's telling
us to pulse luteinizing hormone every so
often. We have a internal cellular clock
that's telling estrogen to pulse every
so often. And we can change that through
differences in sleep, change that
through our light wake time, and through
food intake. How important is it to time
our meals and be intentional about when
we eat?
It's pretty important if we're looking
about how our clock is aligned. Yeah.
And how we are repairing while we're
sleeping. Because if we're eating late
and we've shifted everything late
because people eat late, they go to bed,
they wake up, they're not hungry, they
don't dampen that cortisol peak for
women and then they don't sleep very
well because if you are eating right
before bed, your body is using
parasympathetic response to digest
instead of invoke really good sleep. So
we see a lot of this circadium
misalignment that's occurring. We see it
a lot in shift workers. We see it a lot
in our global society of staying up late
and working and having screens. And the
impact on metabolism is that it changes
appetite hormones for women where it
will increase the craving for
carbohydrates and the desire to eat more
and they don't ever feel full. For men,
it's just a craving aspect and so
they'll eat according to cravings. It's
called hedonistic eating rather than a
true change in appetite hormones. So
people who are having difficulty
sleeping and difficulty changing body
composition for overall health, we shift
it. We're like, okay, we want to shift
to be able to eat during the day and to
have regular food at regular intervals
so that our body has fuel to do what it
needs during the day. We stop eating at
dinnertime, which is around 6 or 7, have
a good 2 to three hours before we go to
bed. so that when we do go to bed all
our parasympathetic responses can go
into getting really good sleep
architecture. So that means that we get
really good um phases of sleep for
optimal physical mental recovery because
if we have that then we have better
blood glucose control so better insulin
responses. We're able to have more
energy during the day and our all of our
systems work better. I I had noticed
something intriguing about me which is
when I wake up early to go to the
airport. So, say I have to wake up at
like 4:00 a.m. to go to the airport. I
am so hungry. Yeah. And I've never
understood why. Because if I wake up at,
say, 9:00 a.m., I don't wake up as
hungry. Yep. Why? Your brain is
perceiving a stress. And this is that
hedonistic where you're like, uh, my
brain is like, I'm under stress and I
need fuel. I need glucose. So, it thinks
like a line has woken me up. Yeah.
[__] hell, that makes so much sense.
Honestly, it's so it's so it's always
confused me because sometimes I have to
wake up super early, so 2 3 a.m. to go
get a plane or something. And when I get
to the airport, I'm so hungry. But like
a day today, what time is it? It's 1:00
p.m. Mhm. And I haven't eaten yet. I
know you're mad at me, but I haven't
eaten yet because I don't want to eat
before I do a podcast because then it's
going to like it like messes with my
articulation. So, I can't get the words
out my mouth. Okay, that's maybe that's
[__] I'm saying this to someone
that knows what they're talking about,
but maybe there's something else I could
eat. But I just find that if I eat
something heavy or if generally if I eat
the way that I've always rationalized it
is all the oxygen's like going to my
digestive system. Is that nonsense?
That's nonsense, is it? Actually, yeah.
So, can I eat before I do a podcast?
Yes, you can. And it won't impact my
ability to articulate myself. If you're
really worried, then you can have like a
protein shake or protein water. You
could sip protein water while you're
having a podcast. So, then you're
getting amino acid circulating. Your
hypothalamus is like, "Sweet. Okay,
we're all good to go. But I hear you
because I don't like to have a lot of
food in my stomach when I'm going to be
concentrating a lot or trying to
articulate. So, I eat things that are
high in protein but easy to digest.
Okay, try that. So, like protein, water,
a protein shake would be a good idea
before or hard-boiled eggs. Hard-boiled
eggs. Okay. Okay. Let's talk about
menopause then. Yeah. Starting with
permenopause. Yeah. You got a smile on
your face. Oh, it's something that I'm
really excited is coming into
conversations now because three years
ago, no one would say the word. I knew
we had made it as women in society when
the nightly news was talking about
menopause. So, let's go. I'm excited.
One thing I saw which was quite an
interesting observation is in the UK
this year on Apple. Mhm. The most shared
podcast episode in the whole country of
all podcasts was a conversation I had
about menopause. Nice. And
congratulations. That's awesome. It gets
even better. And in the US, the most
shared podcast episode of all podcasts
in the US on Apple
was the same guest on Mel Robbins
podcast talking about menopause. I go,
that's that's incredible. And also crazy
that in both countries, the number one
most shared podcast episode was the same
guest talking about the same topic. Yep.
That doesn't surprise you? Nope. Why?
Well, I know this guest and she's very
good at articulating, but also we have
seen this upsurge of women like myself,
my age group, put myself out there. We
all grew up on the understanding that we
were women, we were a little bit
different from men, but no one told us
about menopause.
And now all of a sudden, there are these
extreme changes that are going on. And
people are like, "What's going on?" And
if I were to take a typical case
scenario of a woman who's in her 40s and
goes to a doctor and goes, "You know
what? I can't sleep. I am trying to
exercise, but I'm so tired. I can't do
it. My body is changing, and I just
don't know what's going on."
The general response to her three years
ago would have been, "Well, look, you're
a woman in her 40s who's highly
stressed. You have kids on one side. You
have older parents on another. You're
trying to You're right in the middle of
your career. You have a really busy
life. Here's an SSRI for anxiety and
depression is going to help you sleep.
But now with all the conversations that
have been going on, a woman in her 40s
will go to a GP and for the most part
will be told, "Well, you're in your 40s.
It might be permenopause."
And this is such a relief to so many
women because they're not being gaslit
anymore. They're not being told that
what they're feeling isn't true. It's
just something to do with stress. Now
they're being told, "You know what? All
your systems in your body are being
affected because your sex hormones are
changing. So remember puberty when
everything was changing and no one wants
to live through puberty anymore. You're
on the other side of that. You're in
reverse puberty where all of your
hormones are starting to downregulate.
So every system in your body is being
affected. Let's unpack it. Let's see
what's going on. So when Mary Cla comes
on and talks about menopause as an MD
and talks about all the things that
she's seeing in her clinic, women are
like, "That's me. Now I understand I'm
not alone." And that's the power that's
coming through all of these
conversations and all of these groups
like Naomi Watts Swell Group, right?
They're talking about menopause. So now
women are listening and keying in and
going, "Wait a second. there actually
are things that are occurring to me and
I can get information which is why these
podcasts are taking off because now
women are like I'm not just crazy there
are actually things happening to me and
people understand that now what can I do
to help myself because it isn't being
taught in med school a lot of the
doctors that are out there are getting
information because they are seeking it
out themselves
and looking to people like Mary Cla and
other like Louise Nuome in the UK who
are actually talking about it and saying
these are the things that are happening
and these are the things that we know
that we can do. Gosh, it's a shame,
isn't it? It's a shame that there must
have been so many women over the years
that went to their doctor and got really
bad advice. Yeah. And were given
anti-depressant medications and stuff
like that. M well the other side is
women who are in their reproductive
years who have something like PCOS or
endometriosis
or they're having irregular periods and
they're put on an oral contraceptive
pill because the doctors don't
understand that there are other things
that are going on that will cause a
misstep in menstrual cycle. So I get
frustrated when teenage girls go to a
doctor with irregular cycles and they're
handed OC's like Skittles. It's like
that's not appropriate either. We have
to actually understand what's going on.
We know that there's irregularity in a
menstrual cycle until people are around
3 years post the onset of their first
menstrual cycle. It's not unusual and OC
is not the answer. If someone's still
having irregularity, we have to look at
lifestyle and say, "Hey, what's going
on?" They're having really heavy
menstrual bleeding. It's not about using
an OC to control it. Let's look and see
why is that happening. Maybe we use an
IUD or maybe we use some other
medication to help. But there's a lot of
things that are not taught in med school
that women are having to find out for
themselves. And so when we listen to
podcasts and we're hearing information
from medical doctors who now have a like
a vocal aspect of being able to touch so
many people, it resonates. So now
doctors are trying to find that
information if they have the time. But
we know the health care systems in most
countries, doctors are so pressed for
time, they don't have that opportunity.
So let's talk about perry menopause.
What do I need to be thinking about?
What what age group typically is
pmenopause?
Um I guess it can be a wide spectrum,
but when does that typically start and
how do I need to be thinking about my
nutrition and exercise in that phase? So
around age 35 up to I think they say now
the average age of menopause is 52 years
old. Okay. So what's happening in that
15 to 17 year span is you're having such
a change in the ratio of estrogen and
progesterone.
Early days, a lot of it appears as I'm
not adapting to my training. It's not
working well. I'm putting on more body
fat. I'm becoming squishy. I'm not
sleeping well. I'm having lots of mood
changes.
It must be. This is why a lot of doctors
say, "Oh, it's because you're busy and
stressed out. Here's a serotonin
reuptake inhibitor." But no, it's
changes in the ratios. How can we dial
it in? We look at menstrual cycles and
is it becoming shorter or longer? What's
our bleed phase? We get into our mid to
late 40s. It's very apparent because
there are a lot of different changes
that are occurring. We're seeing a
change in our blood lipids. There's an
increase in our low density lipoprotein,
which is the quote bad cholesterol. Even
if a woman's never had an issue with it,
now all of a sudden she's having issues
with her cholesterol. We see A1C coming
up, which is a marker for diabetes,
pre-diabetes, without any real change in
what they're doing other than the fact
that their exercise isn't working. Their
sleep is a little bit disrupted and
their body composition is completely
changing. And when we're looking at
what's happening, we see that decrease
in gut microbiome diversity because we
don't have as many sex hormones. So that
impacts serotonin, that impacts vitamin
production, that impacts parasympathetic
drive, and we're also seeing a misstep
in the way liver is reading fat and fat
circulation. So we're seeing free fatty
acids that are coming around. And
because we don't have as much estrogen,
we don't have as much anti-inflammatory
responses. So we can't pull as many free
fatty acids into the mitochondria and
the skeletal muscle to be used as fuel.
So they circulate and the liver has a
signal that goes we're going to change
that free fatty acid into what we call
estrified fatty acid which then gets
stored as visceral fat and visceral fat
is that dangerous fat that gets stored
around the organs which is why women
start to get like a minnow pot or
develop a lot of abdominal atyposity. So
people will start seeing this and going
I don't understand what's going on over
the past six months I put on 10 pounds
or or I put on four stone right what's
going on my training is not working
become very despondent and if they don't
know they're in perry menopause then
they don't know that that's what's
happening and how can they find out if
they are well it's really symptomatic
because we can't use blood tests there
isn't a definitive blood test to say hey
you're a permenopausal you have to have
a a history of everything of getting
blood tests like every week and no one
does that. So we have to go on
symptomology
really using the socioultural aspect of
how a woman is experiencing life with
her symptoms and really listen and say
okay well here are the things that are
going on and we try to instigate non
hormonal options there's exercise.
there's lifestyle and then if all else
is really going to [__] then we can look
at using some menopause hormone therapy
just like we were talking about oimpact
being a tool so hormone therapy can also
be a tool does it matter my pre-existing
health when I approach menopause if I'm
if I've got more weight on my body is
that going to impact the amount of
symptoms that I experience of menopause
it can yeah it can we see that there is
a greater incidence of vasom motor
symptoms or hot flashes es for women who
have a greater amount of body fat. Um we
also see that if you have more lean mass
then you're going to have less of an
incidence of insulin um resistance. So
body composition has a huge play in
symptomology.
And then you also have to look at what
your mom went through because if your
mom had a really really horrible time
with lots of vasom motor symptoms and
body composition change there's a
genetic link. doesn't necessarily mean
that you're going to experience the same
thing, but you have a greater
predisposition to having more severe
symptomology. How should I be thinking
about exercise as I'm going through my
menopause journey? So, we look, as I
said earlier, exercise is a really good
stress for adaptive change. So, when we
start getting into all these ratio
shifts of estrogen, progesterone, we
can't rely on our hormones to create
those adaptive changes. And so what I
mean by that is like estrogen is
responsible for muscle protein synthesis
and and strength and power for women.
Progesterone and estrogen responsible
for bone bone growth, bone density. We
can't rely on our hormones for that
anymore. We have to look for an external
stress. So this is where exercise comes
in. So if we're looking specifically at
how to invoke a stress to change our
insulin sensitivity in in other words
improve our blood glucose control we
need to do proper highintensity work. So
that's sprint interval or it's true
highintensity work to create a stress
that's high enough to have the brain say
hey this is a really really really
strong stress I need to invoke changes
within the skeletal muscle to be able to
store more glucose. I also need to
invoke more changes in the mitochondria
so that it can use and store more free
fatty acids and I'm going to have more
miaakine released from the skeletal
muscle to tell the liver don't estify
those fatty acids. I want to use them at
rest so we don't get viscerial fat gain.
So hit workouts. Yeah. Plyometrics.
Yeah. Which is what jumping and stuff.
Resistance training. Absolutely.
Weights, right? Yeah. But specific to
the type of weights that you're doing.
What about frequency of training and how
long I train for? We want to think about
less volume and more quality. Okay, so
we're not going to the gym for an hour
and a half every day. We're looking at
doing short, sharp, highintensity cardio
or we're looking at doing powerbased
resistance training three times a week
and the cardio can be uh two to four
times a week. Why why shorter durations
of training? We're looking at intensity.
So, if we're doing long slow stuff or
we're doing moderate intensity zone 2
stuff, that's not really going to create
the kind of stress that we need to
invoke change. What about um sauners and
stuff like that? Yeah, absolutely. We
see that women who go into the sauna um
get better control over things like hot
flashes because it's all about
temperature and temperature control. So
if the blood going through the brain is
really hot, it understands, hey, this is
what hot is and can then have subsequent
peripheral changes for controlling heat
and understanding heat as well as
sensual changes to understand heat. And
what about food through menopause? Is
there a specific diet that I should be
thinking about for menopause? We want a
higher protein intake, of course,
because as we get older, we become more
anabolically resistant to protein. So
that means our body isn't responding as
much to the amino acids. So we need a
higher dose to invoke muscle protein
synthesis and bone regeneration, nerve
regeneration.
Also knowing that the recommended daily
allowance that's out there for protein,
especially for women, is based on
sedentary older men. So it's not really
adequate for what we're looking for. Uh
so we want higher incidence of protein
at regular intervals across the day. And
again taking care of that gut
microbiome. So we want a lot of colorful
fruit and veg that also helps with uh
blood glucose control as well as
creating that diversity so that we are
able to reduce the amount of of bacteria
that is responsible for storing body
fat. We want to have that great amount
of diversity of gut microbiomes to or
great diversity of the gut microbiome to
have more of the bacteria that says,
"Hey, you know what? We want more lean
mass. We want to have less body fat." I
noticed earlier on when you talked about
hormone therapy, you referred to it as
menopausal hormone therapy as opposed to
hormone replacement therapy. Yeah. Most
people say HRT, right? Right. Why do you
say something different? Yeah. I got a
lot of my chops and menopause work
through the women's health initiative
and I'm not going to apologize for that
cohort because this study was designed
to look at older women going through
perry menopause or going through
menopause and does it work. So there's a
whole issue around WHI and other things,
but when we look at specifically women
who are going through menopause or
pmenopause into menopause, we're not
looking to replace hormones. We're
looking at a therapy to attenuate
change. If we're looking at hormone
replacement, that could be thyroid, that
could be uh premature ovarian failure
that we need to have some um estrogen,
progesterone. We're looking at menopause
and pmenopause in itself. We're looking
at using a hormone dose that is a very
low physiologic
um level so that we don't have
symptomology. So the body is not going
to have vasom motor symptoms and is not
going to have mood changes and is not
going to really have an incredible
amount of body composition change. If
we're replacing hormones, people have
the idea that it's going to be the same
physiologic level as when we were in our
reproductive years, and that's not the
case. Is there also bit of an underlying
notion that women are using these
hormones to as a way to stay young? And
when you say replace, you're kind of
implying that they're fighting against
something. Yep. That we are replacing
our hormones to stay young and be in our
reproductive years. So if we look at
western society and I like to use um the
cast of friends as an example from you
know 90s to now right and we see that
the cast of friends women all have a
certain look that they've had to
maintain in order to be viable in
Hollywood which means that they're thin
they have good body composition they are
don't have any wrinkles they have really
good lustrous hair and that's the image
that women have now of how they're
supposed to age where men not so much we
see the images of men who are aging
becoming more uh demure I guess so they
have gray hair they have some wrinkles
they're very distinguished and that's
the image we have of men aging there's a
huge disconnect in society so when women
start to experience pmenopause it's a
definitive point of aging and people are
afraid to age everyone's afraid to age
for the most part the idea of aging
gracefully or embracing it hasn't quite
gotten to mainstream So when someone's
like, "Here's some hormones to replace
so you can stay young." People are like,
"Great." But we look at the research and
it's not about staying young. It's about
slowing the rate of change that's so
severe that creates quality of life
distress. And we also see that the
research isn't there for maintaining
brain integrity to prevent dementia,
which is the other thing that's floating
around. It's not there. there's no
evidence to show that taking hormone
therapy is going to stop dementia. So,
there's lots of things out there that's
a a disconnect and trying to say it's
menopause hormone therapy is one way of
getting people to understand that it's
not an anti-aging agent. It's something
to help with this phase of a life and to
help get through so that we don't have
severe changes to our daily life and who
we are as a person. Is there anything
else that we need to talk about as it
relates to menopause? Just want to make
sure we've covered it all. Covered it
all.
It gets better on the other side. I
think that's something people don't talk
about is pmenopause is such the
conversation now with all the the
conversations around hormone therapy,
exercise, lifestyle, but no one talks
about the other side once you've gotten
through pmenopause. Do my joints stop
hurting? Do I stop having all these
sleep interruptions? Do I stop having to
worry about my bones? And if you're
putting in the right lifestyle changes
to maintain bone health, yes. On the
other side, everything becomes a new
normal without the pain and dysfunction
because it's the shift in hormones
that's creating so many different issues
with every system of the body. So if we
get through this with really good um
interventions for preventing or
attenuating the changes that are
happening, the other side is much
better. And for women with PCOS or
endometriosis, is there anything that
they need to be thinking about as it
relates to exercise or nutrition? Yeah.
So there's
I guess a huge misstep in the
understanding that endometriosis
uh is an inflammatory
um response.
Yes and no. There's some more emerging
evidence that it could be a bacterial or
a viral um cause. But with regards to
endometriosis, we see that if you're
able to use some cold water
uh therapy for the most part, so a cold
water plunge around the time that you
think about ovulation where after
ovulation you have endometrial growth.
It reduces the total inflammatory
response so that the endometrial lining
doesn't grow as much. So you don't have
as much growth of endometrial tissue
outside of the uterus. Okay. So we're
looking at how do we stop that extra
growth. We can use environmental cues to
help with that. So that's that cold
therapy. If we look at PCOS, it's all
about um a higher androgen count and we
have more insulin
resistance and how we're training for
exercise is all about how do we control
that insulin resistance. So we look at
high intensity, we look at using
resistance training. So women who have
PCOS, they have irregular cycles. So we
can't use the menstrual cycle as an
indication of stress. So we have to look
at things like heart rate variability.
We have to look at properly putting in
intensity and resistance training to
work with blood glucose levels to again
attenuate some of the symptomology that
comes with PCOS.
What is the most important thing we
haven't talked about that we should have
talked about? That this conversation
isn't just for women.
I'm very grateful that you're very
excited about the menstrual cycle, but
um I think a lot of people kind of tune
out when we start to hear conversations
about women and conversations about sex
differences, but it's for everybody
because if we're going to push forward
and understand how we need to do
research to improve the health of women
and men, then it's a combination in the
conversation.
So I yeah I'm very appreciative to men
who come into the conversation and men
who are in the room and very
appreciative of you for having these
conversations because then it pushes it
out and makes it normal across the
board. Yeah. And the reason I I have
these conversations is because it's a
lot of my conversations at home with my
partner. We spend so long talking about
her menstrual cycle and about uh when
she's ovulating and she talks to me a
lot about how she's feeling because of
that and uh certain things we should be
doing even when we're thinking about
like how to spend the weekend. It's
often decided through the context of
like her cycle and then obviously we're
trying to we're in the phase of life
where we're going to try and have kids
now. So we're thinking a lot about it
there. But then just more broadly, you
know, if something is having such a
significant impact on a woman's life,
which I think it does. I think it does
have significant impact, things like
menopause and the menstrual cycle
generally, then I'm going to interface
with women my whole life. If I have a
daughter, I have sisters, I have a mom,
I have a partner. So, if I can better
understand um them because I understand
how their body is working, then we're
going to have more successful
relationships. And frankly, a year ago,
I didn't even know what menopause was.
Yeah. So, yay. To be fair, I didn't even
know what a menstrual cycle really was a
year ago. I knew that women had periods,
but I couldn't tell could have told you
with great confidence that different
things happen throughout the cycle and
that it was 28 days long. I really had
no idea. And I'm like 32 years old and I
don't really care about admitting that.
People like you, but I don't really care
because I know there's a lot of people
out there that feel the same way and and
we're like not allowed to admit that
because then you get people attack you
or whatever, but who cares? I had a PhD
student who came up to me and he's like,
"My partner has something to tell you
and it's going to come through me." I
was like, "Okay, what is it?" He said,
"She said to tell you that I know more
about the menstrual cycle than she
does." I was like, "Awesome." Cuz he was
looking at women in the heat versus men
in the heat. So, we had to understand
the menstrual cycle and how all that
came. And then that upskilled her. So,
it came in the opposite. Instead of her
trying to upskill him, he upskilled her.
We don't really learn about this stuff
in school. No, nobody ever told me about
it in school. Do women learn about it in
school? Not anymore. It's been cut. All
the health programs and everything have
been cut. So, um, yeah, it's really like
I give talks and the rooms get full of
parents who want to know what's
happening. Like I give talks for young
kids who are, you know, surf life-
saving or whatever, just explaining it
all. And then I'll get questions for
women, well, what about pmenopause? What
about menopause? What about IUD? What
about this? What about that? because
it's not taught and it's it's um yeah,
it's really scary. All of the subjects
we've discussed today are in these two
excellent books. Well, there's even more
in the books, but all the subjects that
I touch on pretty much all of them are
in either of these two books. Next
level, which is your guide to kicking
ass, feeling great, and crushing goals
through menopause and beyond, and your
book raw, which is match your food and
fitness to your unique female physiology
for optimal performance, great health,
and a strong body for life. I would not
have been able to read that if I had
eaten today. I would not if you if you
had had a protein shake, you would have
been able to read it. Even better, maybe
we have a closing tradition on this
podcast where the last guest leaves a
question for the next guest, not knowing
who they're going to be leaving it for.
And the question that's been left for
you is, if you have children, what is
the most important message you would
pass on to them? If you don't, then what
is the most important message you would
have passed yourself as a child? I have
a daughter. Mhm. And the most important
messaging that I keep giving to her is
to be empowered, to ask questions and to
be empowered. And she'll often say,
"Well, what does that mean, Mom?" I'm
like, "You have a question, you ask it.
Don't be afraid to ask it because if you
don't know, you don't know." So, society
is very changing. I want you to be
empowered and be educated to and have
the confidence to ask questions. Stacy,
thank you so much for the work that you
do. It's incredibly important and it's
so wonderful that people are shining a
light on some of these differences
between men and women. Um because yeah
like me and my partner train together we
work out we it's a big part of our
relationship in life and now having
studied your work which was absolutely
fascinating to me because it was again
it was a first for me to understand that
there was any differences in these sort
of things that have been pushed on us in
ter in culture in terms of exercise
nutrition cold plunges fasting etc.
Absolutely fascinating. But it's been a
huge conversation now between me and
her. We were talking before I came on
air um about this and it's really turned
the lights on and it's actually made a
lot of things make sense. Excellent. A
lot of things make sense that we were
pondering. So, thank you so much for the
work that you do and I highly recommend
everybody goes and checks you out.
Thanks so much. I appreciate it. Are you
going to make her eat before you go
training now? Well, I don't know. I
actually did send her a screenshot of
that of that particular part. Um because
we have the same routine, especially on
like the weekends when we're together.
We get up, we have the coffee, then we
go to the gym. Yeah, we train and then
we go and try and find something to eat
after.
So, she could have cracking coffee.
Yeah, maybe that's a good idea. Maybe
I'll leave it up to her. I listen, I'm
never going to tell her what to do, so I
just sent her the research. Okay.
Encourage her. Yeah. I was like, look at
this. You'll find this interesting, so
we'll see. Awesome. Thank you so much,
[__]
[Music]
Do you know that 80% of New Year's
resolutions fail by February? It's
because we focus too much on the end
goal and we forget the small daily
actions that actually move us forward.
Those actions that are easy to do are
also easy not to do in life. It's easy
to save a dollar, so it's also easy not
to. Making one small improvement each
day, one tiny step in the right
direction has a big difference over
time. And that is the 1% mindset, which
is why we created the 1% diary, a 90day
journal designed to help you stay
consistent and focus on the small wins
and make real progress over time. It
also gives you access to the 1%
community, a space where you can stay
accountable, motivated, inspired along
with many others on the same journey. We
launched the 1% diary in November and it
sold out. So now we're doing a second
drop. Join the wait list at the
diary.com and you'll be the first to
know as soon as it's back in stock. I'll
put the link below.
[Music]